feat: cronjob article (#241)
shuttle-hq/www: _blog/2024-01-24-using-cronjobs-rust.mdx

---
title: "Using Cronjobs in Rust"
description: This article talks about how you can write cron jobs as a web service on Shuttle using the apalis cron job framework.
author: josh
tags: [cronjob, rust, tutorial, guide]
thumb: 
cover: 
date: '2024-01-23T14:30:00'
---

In this article we’re going to talk about how you can write your own cron jobs as a web service using Shuttle! 

Cron jobs (or “scheduled tasks”) are useful for many things. They allow you to automatically do things like:

- Automate data back-ups
- Adding daily reminders (for example to customers who are signed up to a service you own but haven’t started using it yet)

> - Creating/writing reports

Reviewer: Just something I've noticed from the previous article, is that we're not consistent with adding `.` at the end of the sentences when they're part of a list. Personally I prefer to do it, but the most important IMHO is to be consistent.

If you don’t have `cargo-shuttle` installed, you can install it by running the command below (requires Rust + Cargo installed):

```bash
cargo install cargo-shuttle
```

To get started, you’ll want to initialise a project with `cargo-shuttle`:

```bash
cargo shuttle init 
```

You’ll want to make sure to follow the prompt and choose `None` when the framework options come up. This will spawn a custom service that you can use with Shuttle. For this article, we will be using the project name `shuttle-example-cron`. 

Once done, we’ll want to install the following dependencies:

- `serde` - Allows us to de/serialize tasks
- `chrono` - Allows us to use timestamps
- `apalis` - The task queue framework we’ll be using
- `sqlx` - Allows you to interact with your provisioned database
- `shuttle-shared-db` - Provisions database for you from Shuttle (locally via Docker, via the runtime in deployment)
- `tower` - Used with apalis so that the cron job can be hosted.

We can install all of these with the following shell snippet:

```bash
cargo add apalis -F cron,postgres,extensions,retry
cargo add chrono -F serde,clock
cargo add serde -F derive
cargo add shuttle-shared-db -F postgres

> cargo add sqlx -F runtime-tokio-native-tls,postgres

Reviewer 2: These are different in 0.37. The example PR also needs updating

cargo add tower 
```

Now that everything is installed, it’s time to get coding!

## Writing our first cron job

### Adding a database

Before we do anything else, let’s provision a database using the Shuttle runtime. You’ll want to add the `shuttle-shared-db` annotation to your main function like so:

```rust
use sqlx::PgPool;

pub struct MyService {
    db: PgPool,
}

#[shuttle_runtime::main]
async fn shuttle_main(
    #[shuttle_shared_db::Postgres] db: PgPool,
    ) -> Result<MyService, shuttle_runtime::Error> {
    Ok(MyService { db })
}
```

> As you can see, pretty simple! You would otherwise need to run a Docker command to spin this up and in deployment you would also need to manually create your Postgres instance or use Terraform (or some other kind of platform that utilises infrastructure files).

Reviewer: WDYM by "and in deployment" ? If you're talking about production, I would suggest something like "and for production you would need to instantiate and manage your Postgres instance or rely on an IaC (Infrastructure-as-Code) tool like Terraform to do it".

   }
}

// set up an identifier for apalis
impl Job for Reminder {
    const NAME: &'static str = "reminder::DailyReminder";
}
```

Now we want to implement the function that will do the actual work when called by `apalis`. We can set this up so that it just says “Hello world from `say_hello_world()`!”:

```rust
use apalis::prelude::JobContext;

async fn say_hello_world(job: Reminder, ctx: JobContext) {
    println!("Hello world from `say_hello_world()`!");
}
```

However, if you want to add extra variables (for example, a database connection pool) you need to add an extension layer in your service to be able to access them. Let’s have a look at what this struct might look like:

```rust
#[derive(Clone)]
struct CronService { 
    message: String 
}

impl CronService {
    fn execute(&self, item: Reminder) {
        println!("{} from CronService::execute()!", &self.message);
    }
}
```

You can then feed this struct back into the `say_hello_world` function, which uses the `execute()` function:

```rust
async fn say_hello_world(job: Reminder, ctx: JobContext) {
    println!("Hello world from send_reminder()!");
    // this lets you use variables stored in the CronService struct

>     let svc = ctx.data_opt::<CronService>().unwrap();

Reviewer: How is the `message` field inside of `CronService` populated ?

    // this executes CronService::execute()
    svc.execute(job);
}
```

### Hooking it all up

Now we’re going to hook the structs we made previously into our main app!

To start with, we need to set up the `PostgresStorage` type so that we can use Postgres for durable job queues. Without durable job queues, our jobs would disappear if our web service has any outages! We can convert this directly from the `PgPool` type stored in our main struct and run the migrations for it like so:

```rust
#[shuttle_runtime::async_trait]

> impl shuttle_runtime::Service for MyService {

Reviewer: I think I would explain a bit more what `Service` is for Shuttle and link some documentation.

> impl shuttle_runtime::Service for MyService {

Reviewer: `MyService` is called `CronService` earlier.

    async fn bind(
        self, 
        _addr: std::net::SocketAddr
    ) -> Result<(), shuttle_runtime::Error> {
        // set up Postgres-backed storage
        let storage = PostgresStorage::new(self.db);
        // set up storage
        storage.setup().await.expect("Unable to run migrations :(");
    Ok(())
   }
}
```

> Now we can create a `tower` service that holds our job that we want to run. We can use the `DefaultRetryPolicy` provided to us by `apalis` to be able to add automatic re-tries, as well as layering the shared data as an `Extension`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we can create a `tower` service that holds our job that we want to run. We can use the `DefaultRetryPolicy` provided to us by `apalis` to be able to add automatic retries, as well as layering the shared data as an `Extension`:
```
I've only encountered `retries`, not `re-tries`. Is it a British vs US thing ?

Reviewer 3: Let's go with retries.

```rust
use tower::ServiceBuilder;
use apalis::layers::{DefaultRetryLayer, Extension, RetryLayer};
use apalis::prelude::job_fn;

#[shuttle_runtime::async_trait]
impl shuttle_runtime::Service for MyService {
    async fn bind(
        self, 
        _addr: std::net::SocketAddr
    ) -> Result<(), shuttle_runtime::Error> {
    // .. your previous code

    let cron_service_ext = CronService {
    message: "Hello world".to_string(),
};

// create a servicebuilder for the cronjob
let service = ServiceBuilder::new()
    .layer(RetryLayer::new(DefaultRetryPolicy))
    .layer(Extension(cron_service_ext))
    .service(job_fn(say_hello_world));

>     }

Reviewer: The indentation needs to be fixed. It seems like you're mixing tabs and spaces. You should configure your editor to only use space and never tabs (or at least to never mix them).

}
```

Now that we’ve built the service, we need to build the worker and then finally create an `apalis::Monitor` process that will carry the work out:

```rust
use apalis::prelude::timer::TokioTimer;
use apalis::cron::{Schedule, CronStream};
use apalis::prelude::{WorkerBuilder, Monitor};

#[shuttle_runtime::async_trait]

> impl shuttle_runtime::Service for MyService {

Reviewer: How can you implement twice the same trait for the same struct ?

Reviewer: Ah it's actually in the same part. I would display it differently then, this is confusing otherwise. The comment `// .. your previous code` can easily be missed.
